---
layout: post
title: Using crop models illustrating the consequence of irrigation and nitrogen management on crop water productivity
subtitle: >-  Modelling soil water and nitrate
bigimg: /img/path.jpg
published: true
date: 2017/07/03
---

Ecophysiological models are widely applied to simulate the potential impacts of environmental and management factors on agricultural and natural ecosystems(White et al., 2011). They are being used in testing hypothesis in farming systems, evaluation of genetic traits for specific environments (Hunt, 1993), policy management  from global  (eg. impact of climate change on crops) to field level (eg. effect of crop rotation on soil quality) (Ball et al., 2005; Bennett et al., 2012; Brown et al., 2014; Dufresne et al., 2013; Holzworth et al., 2014; Keating et al., 2003; Rosenzweig et al., 2013; Steduto et al., 2009) and investment decisions . Even though such applications have been useful for regional development and agricultural planning in developing countries (Van Keulen and Wolf, 1986), accurate estimation of crop yields has been a challenge especially in African farming systems that are characterized by smallholder farms that produce a wide range of diverse crops. Nevertheless, a range of models have successfully been used as operational support systems to smallholder farmers (eg. selecting optimum planting density and fertilizer applications (Shepherd and Soule, 1998).
(Dimes et al., 2003) reported on a work done with a group of smallholder farmers in Zimbabwe which provided evidence of the role of models in learning and adopting new technologies, with particular focus on soil fertility and climate variability. (Carberry et al., 2002) also highlighted that there is an opportunity to rethink the role of simulation within an action research framework for direct intervention with smallholder farmers. With the exception of these two studies where crop models were used as a discussion tool, their application in smallholder farmers has largely been limited to: testing against data collected from field experiments, estimating average yield, generating net irrigation requirement and irrigation calendar, estimating drainage and leaching, and climate change impact assessments. 
Smallholder farmers face several challenges related to crop, irrigation and fertilizer management and also social challenges such as numeracy and literacy, which hampers their crop productivity.(Stirzaker, 2003) developed FullStop Wetting Front Detectors and more recently (Stirzaker, 2016) Chameleon soil water sensors that can assist farmers to monitor and manage soil nutrient and irrigation water. Chameleons are a set of low cost soil water tension measuring sensors connected to a portable reader that gives output in colour and feeds the data to a web page showing the readings and graphs of the data in colours (Stirzaker, 2016). The Chameleons provide three colours (blue, green and red) depending on soil water tension and work in all type of soils. In this study, we assessed how modelling scenarios can add value to soil water and nitrate monitoring tools. For example, a famer using a Chameleon and FullStop wetting front detectors (WFD) get a snapshot of water, nitrate and salt conditions at one point in time. There are often trade-offs in responding to the monitoring data. Smallholder fields are often under-fertilised and over-irrigated, since water is affordable but fertiliser is not.  It may be easy for a farmer to maintain high soil water content at all depths, but there are some key questions which need to be answered. These include: what is the effect of over-irrigation on nitrate leaching?  can withholding irrigation trigger root growth and uptake of nitrate from deeper soil profile?  How do water and nutrient stress interact and what are their relative contributions to crop yield and water productivity? Besides, if yield is nutrient limited, then will providing more water solve the farmer’s dilemma. We think integrating modelling with FullStop and Chameleon in field research can bridge gaps in field data, and provide quantitative analysis on management alternatives, different crops, soils and weather conditions. 
